Athens, birthplace of democracy, executed the philosopher Socrates in the year 399
bce for the crime of impiety (asebeia), i.e., irreverence toward the gods of the polis,
which his accusers – Meletus, Anytus, and Lycon – had said was a corrupting influence on the young men who kept company with Socrates and imitated his behavior.
But the city had been hearing complaints and jokes about Socrates for some thirty
years by then. A popular comedian had in 414 added the term “to Socratize” (sOkratein)
to the Athenian vocabulary, describing the conduct of long-haired youths who refused
to bathe and carried sticks, affecting Spartan ways (Aristophanes, Birds, 1280–3).
What was different in 399 was a wave of religious fundamentalism that brought with
it a steep rise in the number of impiety cases in Athenian courts. Socrates, maintaining
in his defense that he was not an atheist and that he had never willingly corrupted the
young or indeed knowingly harmed anyone, was found guilty and went willingly to
his execution against the exhortations and the plans of his companions, preferring
death to the alternatives of desisting from philosophy or leaving his beloved polis to
engage in philosophy elsewhere. Plato narrates the indictment, trial, and execution
of Socrates in a series of five dialogues, the Theaetetus, Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, and
Phaedo, set in the spring and summer of that year.
This singular event has been examined and reexamined ever since. There are other
accounts,1
 but it is Plato’s that has become philosophy’s founding myth and that has
immortalized Socrates in the popular imagination as a man of profound moral strength
and intelligence – though also as a uniquely peculiar and inscrutable individual. When
brought to trial, Socrates was 70 years old, married, the father of three sons ranging in
age from 1 to 17, and poor; his net worth, including his house, was 5 minae (Xenophon,
Oeconomicus 2.3.4–5), the equivalent of what a sophist might charge for a single course
(Apology 20b9), and less than a skilled laborer could earn in a year and a half.
He perished without publishing but having inspired his young companion Plato
(424/3–347 bce) and other men known as Socratics to compose dialogues and
memoirs in which Socrates was featured. There were enough of these that Aristotle
was later to refer to such Socratic works as a literary genre (Poetics 1447b11). What
was it about democratic Athens in 399, its politics, religion, culture, laws, or courts –
or about Socrates, or his accusers, or their charges – that might help explain what has
appeared to so many as a great miscarriage of justice? In laying out some of the issues